# Topology PhD exam, May 2021

*Work the following problems and show all work. Support all statements to the best of your ability.*

**1.** Is the quotient space \(X=\mathbb{R}/\mathbb{Z}\) obtained from the reals \(\mathbb{R}\) by collapsing the integers to a point metrizable? Compute homology groups of \(X\).

**2.** Show that any continuous map \(f:\mathbb{RP}^3\to T^3\) is null-homotopic.

**3.** Let \(A\subset\mathbb{R}^3\) be the union of a countable family of lines in \(\mathbb{R}^3\). Prove that \(\mathbb{R}^3\setminus A\) is connected.

**4.** Does there exist a closed orientable \(n\)-manifold \(M\) with
* (a) \(n=4\) and \(H_2(M)=\mathbb{Z}\)?
* (b) \(n=5\) and \(H_3(M)=\mathbb{Z}\)?
* (c) \(n=6\) and \(H_3(M)=\mathbb{Z}\)?

**5.** Let \(p:X\to M_2\) be a covering map of an orientable surface of genus 2 that corresponds to the subgroup \(G\subset\pi_1(M_2)\) generated by \(\{a_1,b_1\}\) in \(\pi_1(M_2)=\langle a_1,a_2,b_1,b_2\mid [a_1,b_1][a_2,b_2]=1\rangle\). Compute homology groups of \(X\).

*Answer the following with complete definitions or statements or short proofs.*

**6.** Compute the Euler characteristic of the manifold \(M=S^2\times S^4\times\mathbb{CP}^{51}\times\mathbb{RP}^{99}\).

**7.** State the Lefschetz Fixed Point Theorem. Derive the Brouwer Fixed Point Theorem from the Lefschetz Fixed Point Theorem.

**8.** Give definitions of retraction, deformation retraction, retract, and deformation retract. Give an example of a retract \(A\) of a topological space which is not a deformation retract.

**9.** Suppose that \(A\) is a retract of \(X\). Is it true that \(H_i(A)\) is a direct summand of \(H_i(X)\)? What about \(H^i(A)\) and \(H^i(X)\)?

**10.** Give definition of the mapping cylinder. Is the Möbius band a mapping cylinder?

**11.** Formulate the Urysohn Lemma.

**12.** Give definition of the mapping cone. Is there a map \(f:X\to Y\) with the mapping cone \(C_f\) homeomorphic to \(\mathbb{RP}^3\)?

**13.** Which of the following spaces are topological groups?
* (a) the torus \(T^2\);
* (b) the Klein bottle \(K\);
* (c) the projective space \(\mathbb{RP}^3\).

**14.** Is \(\mathbb{R}^{\omega}\) connected in the uniform topology?

**15.** State the Five Lemma.
