# Algebra PhD exam, September 1990

*Read through the questions carefully before you begin. Your six best solutions will count. Theorems from the course may be quoted (within reason) as long as you give a clear indication and state the result in full.*

**1.** Let \(P\) be a nontrivial, finite \(p\)-group, and \(Q\) a subgroup. Consider the action of \(P\) on the set \(P/Q\) of left cosets of \(Q\) by left multiplication:
\[P\times P/Q\longrightarrow P/Q,\qquad (p,xQ)\longmapsto (px)Q.\]
\(Q\) acts on \(P/Q\) by restriction.
* a) Show that \(xQ\) is a fixed point of \(Q\) if and only if \(x\in N_P(Q)=\{p\in P\mid pQp^{-1}=Q\}\).
* b) Deduce that if \(Q\) is a proper subgroup of \(P\) then \(Q\) is also a proper subgroup of \(N_P(Q)\).
* c) Hence show that every maximal subgroup of \(P\) is normal of index \(p\).

**2.** Let \(A\) be a Dedekind domain with field of fractions \(K\). Show that every ideal of \(A\) can be generated by two elements. (Hint: use the Chinese remainder theorem.)

**3.** Prove that any simple group of order 60 is isomorphic to \(A_5\). (you need not show that \(A_5\) is simple).

**4.** Let \(A\), \(B\) and \(C\) be rings (with 1) and suppose we have a commutative diagram of ring homomorphisms:
\[
\begin{array}{ccc}
A & \xrightarrow{\alpha} & B \\
& {}_{\gamma}\searrow \quad \swarrow_{\beta} & \\
& C &
\end{array}
\]
* a) Define the structure of an \((A,B)\) bimodule on \(B\), ie make \(B\) into a left \(A\)-module and a right \(B\)-module such that \((a\cdot x)b=a(x\cdot b)\) for \(a\in A\), \(x,b\in B\).
* b) Show that for any right \(A\)-module \(M\), we have a natural isomorphism
  \[M\otimes_A C\cong (M\otimes_A B)\otimes_B C.\]
  (Remember what ‘natural’ means in terms of the functors \(-\otimes_A C\) and \((-\otimes_A B)\otimes_B C\).)

**5.** Let \(\{\sigma_i\}_{i=1}^n\) be a set of \(n\) distinct automorphisms of a field \(k\). Show that if for \(a_1,\ldots,a_n\in k\),
\[\sum a_i\sigma_i(u)=0\qquad\text{for all }u\in k,\]
then \(a_i=0\) for all \(i\). (Hint: show that there is no ‘shortest’ relation with \(a_i\ne0\).)

**6.** Give examples of the following (with proof).
* a) An irreducible cubic polynomial with rational coefficients whose Galois group has order 3.
* b) Two normal extensions \(K\subset L\), \(L\subset M\) such that extension \(K\subset M\) is not normal.

**7.** Let \(R\) be a ring and \(M\) simple (irreducible) \(R\)-module.
* a) Prove Schur's Lemma: every nonzero \(R\)-module map from \(M\) to itself is an isomorphism.
* b) Give an example to show that the converse of Schur's Lemma is false.

**8.** Let \(\mathbb Z_p\) denote the \(p\)-adic integers and for \(n\in\mathbb N\),
\[\varepsilon_n:\mathbb Z_p\longrightarrow \mathbb Z/p^n\mathbb Z,\]
the map defining the structure of \(\mathbb Z_p\) as \(\varprojlim_n\mathbb Z/p^n\mathbb Z\). Let \(U_n=1+p^n\mathbb Z_p\).
* a) Show that \(U_n\) is a subgroup of the group \(U\) of units of \(\mathbb Z_p\).
* b) Show that \(U_n\) is the kernel of \(\varepsilon_n|_U:U\to(\mathbb Z/p^n\mathbb Z)^*\) and that \(U/U_1\cong\mathbb F_p^*\) is cyclic of order \(p-1\).
* c) For \(n\ge1\) show that the map
  \[1+p^nx\longmapsto x\text{ modulo }p\]
  defines an isomorphism
  \[U_n/U_{n+1}\xrightarrow{\sim}\mathbb Z/p\mathbb Z.\]
* d) Deduce that \(U_1/U_n\) is a \(p\)-group and that \(U/U_n\) has a unique subgroup of order \(p-1\).
* e) Prove that \(U\) has a subgroup of order \(p-1\). (Hint: \(U\cong\varprojlim U/U_n\).)

**9.** Let \(D\) be a division ring and \(M\) a \(D\)-module. A subring \(R\) of \(\operatorname{End}_D(M)\) is said to be dense if for any natural number \(n\) and \(v_1,\ldots,v_n\in M\) which are linearly independent over \(D\), and any \(n\) elements \(w_1,\ldots,w_n\) of \(M\), there exists \(r\in R\) such that \(w_i=r(v_i)\), \(i=1,\ldots,n\).
* a) Show that if \(\dim_D M\) is finite then a dense subring of \(\operatorname{End}_D M\) must be equal to \(\operatorname{End}_D M\).
* b) Show that if \(M\) is infinite-dimensional over \(D\) and \(R\) is a dense subring of \(\operatorname{End}_D M\), then for every natural number \(m\), \(R\) has a subring \(S_m\) which maps homomorphically onto \(\operatorname{Mat}_m(D)\).

**10.** This problem has three parts.
* a) State Hilbert's Nullstellensatz, giving the main definitions involved.
* b) Let \(k\) be an algebraically closed field. Show that every algebraic subset of \(k^n\) can be decomposed uniquely as a finite union of (irreducible) varieties.
* c) Give an example to show that in b) the union may not be disjoint.
