# Algebra PhD exam, May 2000

*Please work out seven out of the following eleven exercises. Please do not hand in more than seven.*

**1.** Let \(F\) denote the free group on the set \(X\). Prove that \(F/[F,F]\) is the free abelian group on the set \(X\). (Note: \([F,F]\) denotes the commutator subgroup of \(F\).)

**2.** Recall that a subgroup \(H\) of a product of groups \(G=\prod_{i\in I}G_i\) is said to be a subdirect product if, for each \(i\in I\), the restriction of the projection \(\pi_i:G\longrightarrow G_i\) to \(H\) is surjective.

Let \(\mathcal V\) be a class of groups which is closed under the formation of subdirect products and homomorphic images. Prove that \(\mathcal V\) is also closed under formation of subgroups.

**3.** Let \(R\) be a ring with identity, and \(M\) be a left \(R\)-module. A projective basis for \(M\) is a subset \(\{a_i:i\in I\}\) of \(M\) together with \(R\)-homomorphisms \(f_i:M\longrightarrow R\) such that the following conditions hold. Prove that \(M\) is a projective module if and only if it has a projective basis.
* (i) for each \(a\in M\), \(\left|\{i\in I:f_i(a)\neq 0\}\right|<\infty\), and
* (ii) for each \(a\in M\), \(a=\sum_{i\in I}f_i(a)a_i\).

**4.** Suppose that \(G\) is a finite group and \(K\) is a field. Prove:
* (a) If the characteristic of \(K\) does not divide \(|G|\), then \(K[G]\), the group algebra over \(K\), is a semisimple left Artinian ring. (You may use that \(K[G]\) is a ring with identity, and the Wedderburn–Artin Theorem in all its glory.)
* (b) Show that if the characteristic of \(K\) does divide the order of \(G\), then the Jacobson radical of \(K[G]\) is nontrivial.

**5.** Let \(A\) be a commutative ring with identity, and suppose that \(M\) is an \(A\)-module, and \(I\) is an ideal of \(A\).
* (a) Prove that
  \[
  (A/I)\otimes M\cong M/IM,
  \]
  where \(IM\) is the submodule generated by all elements of the form \(xb\), with \(x\in I\), \(b\in M\).
* (b) Prove that the isomorphism in (a) is natural.

**6.** Suppose that \(A\) is a commutative ring with identity. If every prime ideal of \(A\) is finitely generated, show that \(A\) is Noetherian.

**7.** State and prove the Hilbert Basis Theorem.

**8.** Let \(K\) be a field.
* (a) Define discrete valuation on \(K\), and the notion of a discrete valuation ring.
* (b) Suppose that \(A\) is an integral domain. Prove that it is a discrete valuation ring if and only if it is a principal ideal domain in which
  \[
  p\text{ and }q\text{ irreducible}\implies p=uq,
  \]
  for some unit \(u\in A\).

**9.** Prove that the lattice of all ideals of a Dedekind domain is distributive. (Hint: Localize!)

**10.** Use the notion of formal derivatives to show that, if \(f(T)\) is an irreducible polynomial over the field \(F\), then it has repeated roots in the splitting field if and only if the characteristic of \(F\) is \(p>0\), and \(f(T)=g(T^p)\), for some \(g(T)\in F[T]\).

**11.** Let \(p\) be a prime number.
* (a) Prove that if a subgroup \(H\) of \(S_p\), the symmetric group on \(p\) letters, contains a \(p\)-cycle and a transposition, then \(H=S_p\).
* (b) If \(p(T)\) is an irreducible polynomial over \(\mathbb Q\), of degree \(p\), having exactly two non-real roots, then show that the Galois group of the splitting field of \(p(T)\) is \(S_p\).
