# Algebra PhD exam, August 2005

*Answer seven problems. Write your answers clearly in complete English sentences. You may quote results (within reason) as long as you state them clearly.*

**1.** Let \(\mathcal C\) be a category and let \(\Lambda\) be a set. For each \(\lambda\in\Lambda\), let \(X_\lambda\) be an object in \(\mathcal C\).
* (a) Give the definition of a product of the collection of objects \(\{X_\lambda\}_{\lambda\in\Lambda}\).
* (b) Prove that any two products of the \(\{X_\lambda\}_{\lambda\in\Lambda}\) are isomorphic.
* (c) Prove that products always exist in the category of groups.

**2.** Show that the alternating group \(A_n\) is a simple group for \(n\geq 5\). Show that the symmetric group \(S_n\) is not solvable for \(n\geq 5\).

**3.** State and prove Jacobson’s Density Theorem.

**4.** Consider the polynomial
\[
p(x)=x^5-3x^4-2x^2+2x+2
\]
over \(\mathbb Q\). Can all the roots of \(p(x)\) be written by radicals over \(\mathbb Q\)? Can they be written by radicals over \(\mathbb C\)? Carefully justify both answers.

**5.** Suppose that \(F\) is a finite extension of \(\mathbb Q\). Prove that \(F\) contains only a finite number of roots of unity.

**6.** Let \(F\) be the free group in generators \(x\) and \(y\). Let \(N\) be the subgroup of \(F\) generated by the set
\[
S=\{z^2:z\in F\}.
\]
Prove that \(N\) is a normal subgroup of \(F\), and calculate the order of \(F/N\).

**7.** Let \(A\) be a torsion abelian group, and let \(\mathbb Q\) be the (additive) group of the rational numbers. Prove that \(A\otimes_{\mathbb Z}\mathbb Q=\{0\}\), and that \(\mathbb Q\otimes_{\mathbb Z}\mathbb Q\cong\mathbb Q\).

**8.** Let \(R\) be an integral domain with quotient field \(F\). Suppose that \(a\in R\) is such that \(a\neq 0\) and \(1/a\) is integral over \(R\). Prove that \(a\) is a unit of \(R\).

**9.** Let \(R\) be a commutative ring with \(1\neq 0\). Prove that the set consisting of \(0\) and all zero divisors in \(R\) contains at least one prime ideal.

**10.** Let \(R\) be a commutative ring with identity different from zero. Let \(F_1\) and \(F_2\) be two finitely generated free \(R\)-modules, and assume that \(F_1\cong F_2\) as \(R\)-modules. Prove that the cardinality of the set of free generators for \(F_1\) equals the cardinality of the set of free generators for \(F_2\).

**11.** Let \(R\) and \(S\) be semi-simple rings with exactly \(400\) elements. Assume that neither \(R\) nor \(S\) is commutative. Does it follow that \(R\cong S\)? Justify your answer.
