# Algebra, PhD exam, August 2025

*Answer seven problems. (If you turn in more, the first seven will be graded.) Within reason, you may quote theorems as long as you state them clearly.*

*Note. Below ring means associative ring with identity, and module means unital module unless otherwise specified.*

**1.** Let \(K\) be a field and let \(f(x) \in K[x]\) be a non-zero polynomial.
* (a) Define what is a splitting field for \(f(x)\) over \(K\).
* (b) If \(F_1\) and \(F_2\) are splitting fields for \(f(x)\) over \(K\) prove, from your definition, that \(F_1\) and \(F_2\) are isomorphic fields.

**2.** Suppose that \(p\) is an odd prime and the field \(K\) is the extension of \(\mathbb{Q}\) generated by a primitive \(p\)-th root of \(1\) in \(\mathbb{C}\).
* (a) Show that \(K\) contains a unique quadratic extension \(F\) of \(\mathbb{Q}\).
* (b) What is \(\operatorname{Gal}(K/F)\)? Justify your answer in detail.

**3.** Let \(A\) and \(B\) be finite abelian groups and suppose that \(|A|\) and \(|B|\) are relatively prime. Let \(T=A\otimes_{\mathbb{Z}}B\). Show that \(|T|=1\).

**4.** Let \(\mathcal{C}\) be a concrete category.
* (a) Define what is meant by a free object in \(\mathcal{C}\).
* (b) Let \(\mathcal{G}\) be the category of all finite groups. Prove that the free objects in \(\mathcal{G}\) are exactly the trivial groups.

**5.** Let \(R\) be a ring with identity. Prove that the following two conditions are equivalent for a left \(R\)-module \(P\). (You may not assume any properties of projective modules).
* 1. Every short exact sequence of \(R\)-modules
  \[
  0\to A\to B\to P\to 0
  \]
  splits;
* 2. There is a free \(R\)-module \(F\) and an \(R\)-module \(K\) such that \(F\simeq K\oplus P\).

**6.** Let \(K\) be a field and \(K(x)\) the field of rational functions over \(K\). Let \(\frac{f}{g}\in K(x)\), with \(\frac{f}{g}\notin K\), where \(f\) and \(g\) are relatively prime elements of \(K[x]\).
* (a) Show that \(\frac{f}{g}\) is transcendental over \(K\).
* (b) Prove that \(K(x)\) is a finite extension of \(K\!\left(\frac{f}{g}\right)\).

**7.** State and prove the Lying-Over Theorem on prime ideals and ring extensions.

**8.** Prove that an invertible ideal in an integral domain that is a local ring is principal.

**9.** Show that for any extension \(A\subseteq B\) of commutative rings with \(1\), any \(A\)-module \(M\) and any \(B\)-module \(N\), there is an isomorphism \(\operatorname{Hom}_B(M\otimes_A B,N)\simeq \operatorname{Hom}_A(M,N_A)\) (here \(N_A\) denotes \(N\) considered as an \(A\)-module by means of the ring inclusion homomorphism \(A\to B\)).

**10.** Let \(R\) be a commutative ring with \(1\) with \(1\neq 0\). Prove that the set consisting of \(0\) and all zero divisors in \(R\) contains at least one prime ideal of \(R\).

**11.** Classify (up to ring isomorphism) all (not necessarily commutative) semisimple rings of order \(240\).
