# Algebra PhD exam, August 1997

*Answer seven out of the following ten problems. State clearly any results you need.*

**1.** Let \(A\) be a commutative Noetherian ring with identity. Show that if \(A\) is Noetherian, then so is the power series ring \(A[[X]]\).

**2.** Suppose that \(A\) is a commutative ring with identity, \(B\) is an \(A\)-algebra integral over \(A\), and \(f:A\to K\) is a homomorphism from \(A\) to an algebraically closed field \(K\). Show that \(f\) can be extended to a homomorphism \(g:B\to K\).

**3.** Show that any automorphism of the field \(\mathbb R\) of real numbers is the identity.

**4.** Let \(p\) be a prime, \(n>1\) an integer, and \(G=\operatorname{GL}(n,\mathbb F_p)\). Compute the order of \(G\), and find a \(p\)-Sylow subgroup of \(G\).

**5.** Let \(p\) be a prime,
* (a) Show that if \(S_p\) is the symmetric group on \(p\) letters, and \(H\subseteq S_p\) is a subgroup containing a \(p\)-cycle and a transposition, then \(H=S_p\).
* (b) Suppose \(f(T)\in\mathbb Q[T]\) is irreducible of degree \(p\). Show that if \(f(T)\) has exactly two non-real roots, then the Galois group of the splitting field of \(f(T)\) is \(S_p\).

**6.** Let \(M_n(F)\) denote the algebra of \(n\times n\) matrices over the field \(F\). Fix \(p\) with \(1<p<n\) and let \(R\) be the subalgebra consisting of those matrices in “block form”
\[
\begin{pmatrix}A&B\\0&C\end{pmatrix},
\]
where \(A\) is a \(p\times p\) matrix, and \(C\) is an \((n-p)\times(n-p)\) matrix.
* (a) Describe the Jacobson radical of \(R\).
* (b) Consider the vector space \(V=F^n\) with its natural structure as a left module for \(R\), given by matrix multiplication on the left. Show that \(V\) has an irreducible submodule \(W\) of dimension \(p\) and that \(V/W\) is also irreducible.
* (c) Show that \(V\) is indecomposable, i.e. \(V\) is not the direct sum of two nonzero \(R\)-submodules.

**7.** If \((m,n)=1\), then compute \((\mathbb Z/m\mathbb Z)\otimes_{\mathbb Z}(\mathbb Z/n\mathbb Z)\). Explain.

**8.** Suppose that \(A\) is a commutative ring with identity. If \(A^m\cong A^n\) as \(A\)-modules, show that \(m=n\) (\(A^m\) denotes the direct sum of \(m\) copies of \(A\) as an \(A\)-module, and similarly for \(A^n\)).

**9.** Let \(A\) be a Noetherian ring and \(M\) a finitely generated \(A\)-module. Denote by \(\operatorname{Supp}(M)\) the set of prime ideals \(p\) of \(A\) such that \(M_p\ne0\), where \(M_p\) is the localization of \(M\) at \(p\). Show that if \(M_p=0\) for all \(p\), then \(M=0\).

**10.** This problem has two parts.
* (a) Show that a direct sum of more than one copy of \(\mathbb Z\) is not generated by a single element.
* (b) Deduce that a direct sum of more than one copy of \(\mathbb Z\) is not a free group.
