# Algebra PhD exam, May 1996

*Answer seven out of the following ten problems. State clearly any results you need.*

**1.** Let \(R\) be an integral domain, with fraction field \(K\). Recall that an \(R\)-submodule \(I\) of \(K\) is said to be invertible if \(II^{-1}=R\), where \(I^{-1}=\{x\in K\mid ix\in R\text{ for all }i\in I\}\). Show that if \(I\) is invertible, then it is finitely generated and projective.

**2.** This problem has two parts.
* (a) Let \(k\) be an algebraically closed field and \(R\) a commutative, finitely generated \(k\)-algebra. Show that the Jacobson radical of \(R\) is the same as the nilradical. (Hint: Nullstellensatz).
* (b) Give an example of a commutative ring with identity whose Jacobson radical is not equal to its nilradical.

**3.** Compute the Galois group of the extension \(K/\mathbb{Q}\), where \(K\) is the splitting field over \(\mathbb{Q}\) of the polynomial \(X^4-3\).

**4.** Let \(K\) be a field, and \(R\) a simple, finite-dimensional \(K\)-algebra with identity (not necessarily commutative). Show that if the identity is the only (nonzero) idempotent element of \(R\), then \(R\) is a division ring.

**5.** Let \(R\) be a discrete valuation ring with fraction field \(K\). Show that \(R\) is integrally closed in \(K\).

**6.** This problem has two parts.
* (a) Suppose \(G\) is a finite \(p\)-group and \(S\) is a finite set on which \(G\) acts. If \(S^G\) is the set of elements of \(S\) fixed by \(G\), show that \(\lvert S\rvert\equiv\lvert S^G\rvert\pmod p\).
* (b) Suppose \(G\) is a \(p\)-group, \(k\) is a field of characteristic \(p\), \(V\) is a finite-dimensional \(k\)-vector space, and \(\rho:G\to\operatorname{GL}(V)\) is a homomorphism. Show that there is a nonzero vector \(v\in V\) such that \(\rho(g)(v)=v\) for all \(g\in G\). Hint: reduce to the case where \(k\) is finite, and apply (a).

**7.** Let \(k\) be a field and \(G=\operatorname{GL}(3,k)\). Describe the conjugacy classes of elements of order 3 in \(G\) if
* (a) \(k=\mathbb{C}\),
* (b) \(k=\mathbb{R}\),
* (c) \(k=\mathbb{F}_3\).

**8.** Let \(R\) be a commutative ring. Define what it means for an \(R\)-module to be injective. Show that an \(R\)-module \(M\) is injective if and only if for every ideal \(I\subseteq R\) and \(R\)-linear map \(f:I\to M\), \(f\) extends to a map \(R\to M\).

**9.** This problem has two parts.
* (a) Show that there exist solvable groups of arbitrarily large derived length.
* (b) Show that if \(S\) is an infinite set, then there is no “free solvable group generated by \(S\)”; i.e. there is no solvable group \(F\) and map \(\alpha:S\to F\) such that composition with \(\alpha\) induces, for any solvable group \(G\), a bijection between the set of group homomorphisms \(F\to G\) and the set of maps \(S\to G\).

**10.** State and prove the Hilbert Basis Theorem.
