# Algebra, PhD exam, May 2018

*Answer seven problems. Write your answers clearly in complete English sentences. You may quote results (within reason) as long as you state them clearly.*

**1.** Determine the Galois group of the polynomial
\[
f=x^4-2\in\mathbb{Q}[x].
\]

**2.** Let \(K\) be a field and \(K(x)\) the field of rational functions over \(K\). Let \(\frac{f}{g}\in K(x)\), with \(\frac{f}{g}\notin K\), where \(f\) and \(g\) are relatively prime elements of \(K[x]\).
* (a) Show that \(\frac{f}{g}\) is transcendental over \(K\).
* (b) Prove that \(K(x)\) is a finite extension of \(K\left(\frac{f}{g}\right)\).

**3.** Let \(C\) be a category and let \(\Lambda\) be a set. Suppose that for each \(\lambda\in\Lambda\) we are given an object \(X_\lambda\) in \(C\).
* (a) Give the definition of a coproduct of the collection of objects \(\{X_\lambda\}_{\lambda\in\Lambda}\).
* (b) Prove that any two coproducts of the \(\{X_\lambda\}_{\lambda\in\Lambda}\) are isomorphic.
* (c) Prove that in the category of Abelian groups a coproduct exists for any collection of objects indexed by a set \(\Lambda\).

**4.** Let \(F\) be the free group on two generators \(x\) and \(y\). Prove that the commutator subgroup is not finitely generated.

**5.** Let \(A\) be a torsion abelian group, and let \(\mathbb{Q}\) be the (additive) group of the rational numbers.
* (a) Prove \(A\otimes_{\mathbb{Z}}\mathbb{Q}=\{0\}\).
* (b) Prove \(\mathbb{Q}\otimes_{\mathbb{Z}}\mathbb{Q}\simeq\mathbb{Q}\).

**6.** Let \(R\) be a ring and suppose that we have the following commutative diagram of \(R\)-modules and module homomorphisms with exact rows.
\[
\require{amscd}
\begin{CD}
0 @>>> A @>{f}>> B @>{g}>> C @>>> 0 \\
@. @V{\alpha}VV @V{\beta}VV @V{\gamma}VV @. \\
0 @>>> A' @>{f'}>> B' @>{g'}>> C' @>>> 0
\end{CD}
\]
* (a) Show that if \(\alpha\) and \(\gamma\) are monomorphisms, then so is \(\beta\).
* (b) Show that if \(\alpha\) and \(\gamma\) are epimorphisms, then so is \(\beta\).

**7.** Let \(R\) be a commutative ring with \(1\ne 0\). Prove that the set consisting of \(0\) and all zero divisors in \(R\) contains at least one prime ideal.

**8.** State and prove Hilbert’s Basis Theorem.

**9.** Prove that an ideal of a Dedekind domain can be generated by two elements.

**10.** This problem has two parts.
* (a) Prove Schur’s Lemma: If \(R\) is a ring and \(M\) a simple \(R\)-module, then \(D:=\operatorname{Hom}_R(M,M)\) is a division ring.
* (b) Give an example of \(R\) and \(M\) as above where \(D\) is not a field.

**11.** Let \(V\) be a nonzero vector space over a field \(F\). Prove that \(R=\operatorname{Hom}_F(V,V)\) is a simple ring if and only if \(V\) is finite-dimensional over \(F\).
