# Analysis PhD exam, May 2018

*Do six of eight. Write solutions in a neat and logical fashion, giving complete reasons for all steps.*

**1.** Suppose \((X,\mathcal M)\) and \((Y,\mathcal N)\) are measurable spaces, \(\mathcal E\subset\mathcal N\) and \(f:X\to Y\). Show, if the \(\sigma\)-algebra generated by \(\mathcal E\) contains \(\mathcal N\) and \(f^{-1}(E)\in\mathcal M\) for all \(E\in\mathcal E\), then \(f\) is \(\mathcal M\)-\(\mathcal N\) measurable.

**2.** Do two. In each case, give a brief justification for your answer.
* (a) Give an example, if possible, of a measurable set \(C\subset\mathbb R\) of positive Lebesgue measure that contains no (non-trivial) interval.
* (b) Give an example, if possible, of a measure space \((X,\mathcal M,\mu)\) and a sequence of measurable functions \(f_n:X\to\mathbb C\) that converge in measure, but not pointwise a.e.
* (c) Give an example, if possible, of measure spaces \((X,\mathcal M,\mu)\) and \((Y,\mathcal N,\nu)\) and a function \(f:X\times Y\to[0,\infty)\) that is measurable with respect to the product measure \(\sigma\)-algebra \(\mathcal M\otimes\mathcal N\), but for which
  \[
  \int_X\int_Y f(x,y)\,d\nu\,d\mu\ne\int_Y\int_X f(x,y)\,d\mu\,d\nu.
  \]

**3.** Let \((X,\mathcal M,\mu)\) be a \(\sigma\)-finite measure space (\(\mu\) a positive measure). Suppose \(\mathcal N\) is a sub-\(\sigma\)-algebra of \(\mathcal M\) and \(\nu=\mu|_{\mathcal N}\) is \(\sigma\)-finite. Given \(f\in L^1(\mu)\), show, by considering the mapping \(\rho:\mathcal N\to[0,\infty)\) defined by \(\rho(E)=\int_E f\,d\mu\), that there exists an \(\mathcal N\)-measurable \(g\) such that \(g\in L^1(\nu)\) and
\[
\int_E f\,d\mu=\int_E g\,d\nu
\]
for all \(E\in\mathcal N\). Determine \(g\) in the case \((X,\mathcal M,\mu)\) is the interval \([0,1]\) with Lebesgue measure and \(\mathcal N=\{\varnothing,[0,\tfrac12),[\tfrac12,1],[0,1]\}\).

**4.** Show \(f:[0,\infty)\to\mathbb R\) defined by \(f(x)=(1+x)^{-2}\) is integrable (with respect to Lebesgue measure on \([0,\infty)\)). Determine
\[
\lim_{n\to\infty}\int_0^\infty \frac{\sin(x/n)}{(1+(x/n))^n}\,dx.
\]

**5.** Prove, if \(X\) is a Banach space and \(M\) is a finite dimensional subspace of \(X\), then there is a closed subspace \(N\) of \(X\) such that \(M\cap N=(0)\) and for each \(x\in X\) there exist \(m\in M\) and \(n\in N\) such that \(x=m+n\).

**6.** Let \((X,\mathcal M,\mu)\) be a measure space and suppose \(1\le q<p<\infty\). Show, if \(L^p(\mu)\subset L^q(\mu)\), then there is a constant \(\kappa\) such that if \(E\in\mathcal M\) and \(\mu(E)<\infty\), then \(\mu(E)\le\kappa\).

**7.** Suppose \(E\subset\mathbb R\) is (Lebesgue) measurable with positive measure. Show
\[
E-E:=\{x-y:x,y\in E\}
\]
contains an open interval about \(0\).

**8.** Recall \(c_{00}\) is the vector subspace of \(\ell^\infty(\mathbb N)\) consisting of sequences \(a=(a_n)\) that are eventually zero (meaning there is an \(N\), depending on \(a\), such that \(a_n=0\) for \(n>N\)). Is there a norm on \(c_{00}\) that makes \(c_{00}\) a Banach space?
