# Analysis PhD exam, January 2017

*Do six of eight. Write solutions in a neat and logical fashion, giving complete reasons for all steps.*

**1.** Suppose \((X,\mathcal M)\) and \((Y,\mathcal N)\) are measurable spaces, \(\mathcal E\subset\mathcal N\) and \(f:X\to Y\). Show, if the \(\sigma\)-algebra generated by \(\mathcal E\) contains \(\mathcal N\) and \(f^{-1}(E)\in\mathcal M\) for all \(E\in\mathcal E\), then \(f\) is \(\mathcal M\)–\(\mathcal N\) measurable.

**2.** Suppose \((X,\mathcal M,\mu)\) is a measure space, \(f:X\to[0,\infty)\) is measurable and \(\int_X f<\infty\). For positive integers \(n\), let \(E_n=\{f\leq n\}\). Show,
* (a) the sequence \(\left(\int_{E_n}f\right)\) converges to \(\int f\);
* (b) for each \(\epsilon>0\) there is a positive integer \(M\) such that \[\int_{E_M^c}f<\epsilon;\]
* (c) for each \(\epsilon>0\) there is a \(\delta>0\) such that if \(E\in\mathcal M\) and \(\mu(E)<\delta\), then \(\int_E f<\epsilon\).

**3.** Let \((X,\mathcal M,\mu)\) be a measure space with completion \((X,\overline{\mathcal M},\overline\mu)\). Show, if \(f:X\to\mathbb R\) is \(\overline\mu\) measurable, then there exists a \(\mu\) measurable \(g:X\to\mathbb R\) such that \(\overline\mu(\{x\in X:f(x)\neq g(x)\})=0\).

**4.** Given \(f\in L^1([0,1])\), let \(g(x)=\int_x^1\frac{f(t)}{t}\,dt\). Show \(g\in L^1([0,1])\) and \[\int_0^1g(x)\,dx=\int_0^1f(t)\,dt.\]

**5.** Let \(X\) be a normed vector space (over \(\mathbb C\)). Suppose \(\mathcal M\subset X\) is a closed subspace and \(x\in X\setminus\mathcal M\). Prove the subspace \(\mathcal N=\mathcal M+\mathbb Cx\) is closed in \(X\). Prove if \(\mathcal L\subset X\) is a finite dimensional subspace, then \(\mathcal L\) is closed in \(X\).

**6.** Suppose \((X,\mathcal M,\mu)\) is a \(\sigma\)-finite measure space. Prove the set of simple functions in \(L^2(\mu)\) is dense in \(L^2(\mu)\).

**7.** State the Baire Category Theorem. Suppose \(X\) is a Banach space. Prove that, as a vector space, \(X\) does not have a countable basis. Show there is no norm \(\|\cdot\|\) on \(c_{00}\) such that the normed vector space \((c_{00},\|\cdot\|)\) is a Banach space.

**8.** Suppose \((X,\mathcal M,\mu)\) is a \(\sigma\)-finite measure space. Recall that the mapping \(\lambda:L^\infty(\mu)\to L^1(\mu)^*\) defined, for \(g\in L^\infty(\mu)\), by \(g\mapsto\lambda_g:L^1(\mu)\to\mathbb C\), where, for \(f\in L^1(\mu)\), \[\lambda_g(f)=\int_X fg\,d\mu,\] is an isometric isomorphism. Prove the following special case of this duality result. Suppose \((X,\mathcal M,\mu)\) is a finite measure space. Let \(L^1_{\mathbb R}(\mu)\) denote the real Banach space of real-valued functions in \(L^1(\mu)\). Suppose \(\lambda\in L^1_{\mathbb R}(\mu)^*\) (the dual space) and \(\lambda(f)\geq0\) for each \(f\in L^1_{\mathbb R}(\mu)\) such that \(f\geq0\) (pointwise). Prove there is an integrable function \(g:X\to\mathbb R\) such that \[\lambda(f)=\int_X fg\,d\mu.\]
