# Analysis PhD exam, August 2007

*Attempt EIGHT questions. To receive credit be sure to state clearly the theorems used in solutions.*

**1.** Let \((X,\mathcal S,\mu)\) be the following measure space: \(X\) is the set of positive integers, \(\mathcal S\) is the power set of \(X\), and \(\mu\) is the counting measure. If \(f\) is \(\mu\)-integrable, does \(\sum |f(m)|\) converge? Prove. Is the converse true? Prove.

**2.** Let \(\mu\) and \(\nu\) be finite valued signed measures such that \(\mu\ll\nu\) and \(\nu\ll\mu\). Prove that \(\left(\frac{d\mu}{d\nu}\right)\left(\frac{d\nu}{d\mu}\right)=1\) a.e.

**3.** Let \(\Sigma\) be an algebra of subsets of a set \(S\) and \(\sigma(\Sigma)\) the σ-algebra generated by \(\Sigma\). State the Hahn extension theorem for a σ-finite measure \(\mu\) defined on \(\Sigma\). Use a Monotone Class argument to prove that the extension is unique.

**4.** Let \(\{x_m\}\) be a sequence of elements from a Banach space \(\mathcal X\). Suppose \(\sum \|x_m\|<\infty\). Does \(\sum x_m\) converge unconditionally? Prove.

**5.** Let \(\mathcal M\) and \(\mathcal N\) be closed linear subspaces of a Hilbert space \(\mathcal H\). Assume \(\mathcal M\perp\mathcal N\). Show \(\mathcal M+\mathcal N\) is closed.

**6.** Let \(\mathcal X\) be a Banach space and suppose \(\Pi:\mathcal X\to\mathcal X^{**}\) is the natural embedding map. Is \(\Pi(\mathcal X)\) closed in \(\mathcal X^{**}\)? Prove.

**7.** Let \(L^1(\mathbb R)\) be the space of Lebesgue integrable functions on \(\mathbb R\). Assume \(E\) is a Lebesgue measurable set. Denote by \(Y\) the set of all functions \(f\in L^1(\mathbb R)\) such that \(f(t)=f(-t)\) for almost all \(t\in E\). Prove \(Y\) is closed in \(L^1(\mathbb R)\).

**8.** Let \((\Omega,\mathcal F,P)\) be a probability space and \(\mathcal D\) a sub-σ-algebra of \(\mathcal F\). Suppose \(f\in L^2(\Omega,\mathcal F,P)\). Show by Hilbert space theory that there exist a \(\mathcal D\)-measurable function \(h\) such that \[\int_D f\,dP=\int_D h\,dP,\qquad D\in\mathcal D.\]

**9.** Let \(\mathcal Y\) and \(\mathcal Z\) be closed linear subspaces of the Banach space \(\mathcal X\) such that each \(x\in\mathcal X\) has a unique representation \(x=y+z\), where \(y\in\mathcal Y\) and \(z\in\mathcal Z\). Show that there exists a constant \(K\) such that \(\|y\|\le K\|x\|\) and \(\|z\|\le K\|x\|\), for all \(x\in\mathcal X\), where \(x=y+z\) is the above representation of \(x\).
