# Analysis PhD exam, May 2017

*Do six of eight. Problems (2) and (5) are short answer. For the remaining problems, please provide complete proofs with all details.*

**1.** Prove that if \(X,Y\) are topological spaces and \(f:X\to Y\) is continuous, then \(f\) is Borel measurable.

**2.** Do three of four.
* (a) Give an example, if possible, of a closed set \(E\subset\mathbb R\) of positive Lebesgue measure that contains no interval.
* (b) Give an example, if possible, of a sequence \(f_n:[0,1]\to\mathbb R\) of Lebesgue measurable functions that converges in measure, but not pointwise a.e.
* (c) Give an example, if possible, of a premeasure on a Boolean algebra \(\mathcal A\) without a unique extension to a measure on the \(\sigma\)-algebra generated by \(\mathcal A\).
* (d) Determine the limit of the sequence \((a_n)_{n=1}^{\infty}\), defined by
  \[
  a_n=\int_1^{\infty}\frac{\cos^2(\pi t)}{t^n}\,dt.
  \]

**3.** Suppose \((X,\mathcal M,\mu)\) is a \(\sigma\)-finite measure space and \(\mathcal N\subset\mathcal M\) is a (sub) \(\sigma\)-algebra. Let \(\nu=\mu|_{\mathcal N}\). Show, if \((X,\mathcal N,\nu)\) is a \(\sigma\)-finite measure space and \(f\in L^1(\mu)\), then there exists a \(g\in L^1(\nu)\) such that, for all \(E\in\mathcal N\),
\[
\int_E g\,d\nu=\int_E f\,d\mu.
\]
Is the \(\sigma\)-finiteness hypothesis on \(\nu\) necessary?

**4.** Given \(f\in L^1([0,1])\), let \(g(x)=\int_x^1\frac{f(t)}{t}\,dt\). Show \(g\in L^1([0,1])\) and
\[
\int_0^1 g=\int_0^1 f.
\]

**5.** Do three of four.
* (a) Is there a norm on the vector space
  \[
  c_{00}=\{f:\mathbb N\to\mathbb C:\text{ there exists an }N\text{ such that }f(n)=0\text{ for }n\ge N\}
  \]
  that makes \(c_{00}\) a Banach space?
* (b) Explain what is meant by the Fourier transform of a function \(f\in L^2(\mathbb R)\).
* (c) Is there bounded linear bijection between \(C([0,1])\) and \(L^\infty([0,1])\)?
* (d) Give an example, if possible, of a sequence of unit vectors \((f_n)\) from \(L^2(\mathbb R)\) that converges weakly to some \(f\in L^2(\mathbb R)\), but not in norm.

**6.** Show, if \(E\subset\mathbb R\) is a Lebesgue measurable set of positive measure, then \(E-E=\{x-y:x,y\in E\}\) contains an open interval.

**7.** Suppose \(\mathcal X\) is a Banach space and \(\mathcal M\) and \(\mathcal N\) are closed subspaces. Show, if for each \(x\in\mathcal X\) there exist unique \(m\in\mathcal M\) and \(n\in\mathcal N\) such that
\[
x=m+n,
\]
then the mapping \(P:\mathcal X\to\mathcal M\) defined by \(Px=m\) is bounded.

**8.** Suppose \((X,\mathcal M,\mu)\) is a \(\sigma\)-finite measure space and \(1\le q<p<\infty\). Show, \(L^q\subset L^p\) if and only if there exists a \(\delta>0\) such that if \(E\in\mathcal M\) then either \(\mu(E)=0\) or \(\mu(E)\ge\delta\).
