# Algebra, first year exam, August 2015, Part 2

*Answer four problems. (If you turn in more, the first four will be graded.) Within reason, you may quote theorems as long as you state them clearly.*

**1.** Let \(R\) be a principal ideal domain. Prove that it satisfies the ascending chain condition on ideals.

**2.** This problem has three parts.
* (a) Define Unique Factorization Domain.
* (b) Define irreducible element of an integral domain \(R\).
* (c) Prove from your definitions, that if \(R\) is a Unique Factorization Domain and \(p\) is an irreducible element of \(R\), then the ideal \(P=(p)\) generated by \(p\) is a prime ideal of \(R\).

**3.** This problem has two parts.
* (a) Define Euclidean domain.
* (b) Prove that every Euclidean domain is a principal ideal domain.

**4.** Let \(R\) be an integral domain and let \(M\) be an \(R\)-module. Suppose that \(N\) is an \(R\)-submodule of \(M\). We denote by \(\operatorname{Ann}(M)\) the annihilator of \(M\) in \(R\), so that \(\operatorname{Ann}(M)\) is an ideal of \(R\).
* (a) Prove that \(\operatorname{Ann}(M/N)\operatorname{Ann}(N)\subseteq\operatorname{Ann}(M)\).
* (b) Give an example (with proof) where \(\operatorname{Ann}(M/N)\operatorname{Ann}(N)\ne\operatorname{Ann}(M)\).
* (c) Give an example (with proof) where \(\operatorname{Ann}(M/N)\operatorname{Ann}(N)=\operatorname{Ann}(M)\).

**5.** How many distinct isomorphism types of abelian groups of order \(2^4\cdot 3^4\cdot 5^4\) and exponent \(2^3\cdot 3\cdot 5^2\) are there? Justify your answer carefully.

**6.** Let \(K\) be a splitting field for \(x^4+2\) over \(\mathbb{Q}\). Calculate the degree of \([K:\mathbb{Q}]\), justifying carefully each step.
