# Algebra first year exam, May 2022, Part 1

*Answer 4 questions. You should indicate which 4 problems you wish to be graded. Write your solutions clearly in complete English sentences. You may quote results (within reason) as long as you state them clearly.*

**1.** This question is about the additive group of rational numbers, denoted by \(\mathbb{Q}\).
* (a) Prove that the group \(\mathbb{Q}\) has no proper subgroups of finite index.
* (b) Prove that \(\mathbb{Q}\) does not have a finite generating set.

**2.** Let \(G\) be a finite group and \(N\) a normal subgroup. Show that if \(p\) is a prime and \(P\) is a Sylow \(p\)-subgroup of \(G\), then \(P\cap N\) is a Sylow \(p\)-subgroup of \(N\).

**3.** Let \(G\) be a finite group.
* (a) Define what is meant by a maximal subgroup of \(G\).
* (b) Let \(H\) denote the intersection of all the maximal subgroups of \(G\). Prove that \(H\) is a characteristic subgroup of \(G\).
* (c) Let \(H\) be as in (b). Prove that if \(X\) is a subset of \(G\) such that \(\langle X\cup H\rangle=G\), then \(\langle X\rangle=G\). (Here \(\langle S\rangle\) denotes the subgroup generated by the set \(S\).)

**4.** Let \(G\) be a nonabelian simple group. In \(G\times G\), let \(G_1=\{(g,1)\mid g\in G\}\), \(G_2=\{(1,g)\mid g\in G\}\). Prove that \(G_1\) and \(G_2\) are the only proper nontrivial normal subgroups of \(G\times G\).

**5.** Let \(S_n\) and \(A_n\), denote the symmetric group and alternating group of degree \(n\) respectively, where \(n\geq 2\). Suppose \(\sigma\) and \(\sigma'\) are elements of \(A_n\) that are in the same \(S_n\)-conjugacy class. Show that they lie in the same \(A_n\)-conjugacy class if and only if there is an odd permutation in the centralizer of \(\sigma\) in \(S_n\).

**6.** This problem has two parts.
* (a) Compute the order of \(\operatorname{GL}(2,17)\), factored into prime powers.
* (b) Prove that a group of order \(7\cdot 17^2\) must be abelian.
