# Algebra first year exam, August 2022, Part 1

*Answer 4 questions. Write your solutions clearly in complete English sentences. You may quote results (within reason) as long as you state them clearly.*

**1.** Prove that the alternating group \(A_n\), \(n \ge 3\), is generated by 3-cycles. (You may assume that \(S_n\) is generated by transpositions.)

**2.** This problem has two parts.
* (a) Prove that a group \(G\) of order 75 has a unique subgroup \(H\) of order 25.
* (b) Show that if the above subgroup \(H\) is cyclic then \(G\) is abelian.

**3.** Let \(G\) be symmetric group \(S_n\) acting on \(X=\{1,2,\ldots,n\}\), \(n \ge 2\).
* (a) Explain how we have an induced action on the set \(X \times X\) of ordered pairs \((a,b)\), with \(a,b \in \{1,2,\ldots,n\}\).
* (b) Show that there are two orbits of the action on \(X \times X\) and describe them.
* (c) Describe the stabilizer in \(G\) of an element in each of the two orbits.

**4.** This problem is about \(G=\operatorname{GL}(3,2)\), the group of invertible \(3 \times 3\) matrices with entries from the field \(\mathbb{F}_2\) of two elements.
* (a) Compute the order of \(G\).
* (b) Prove that the set
  \[
  S=\left\{\left.\begin{pmatrix}1&a&b\\0&1&c\\0&0&1\end{pmatrix}\,\right|\,a,b,c\in\mathbb{F}_2\right\}
  \]
  forms a Sylow 2-subgroup of \(G\).
* (c) Find a subgroup \(H\) with \(S \lneq H \lneq G\).

**5.** Let \(G\) be a finite group and let \(p\) be a prime. A \(p\)-subgroup of \(G\) is a subgroup whose order is a power of \(p\).
* (a) Prove that if \(P\) and \(Q\) are normal \(p\)-subgroups of \(G\), then so is \(PQ\).
* (b) Deduce that \(G\) has a subgroup \(K\) that is a normal \(p\)-subgroup and contains every normal \(p\)-subgroup.
* (c) Prove that \(G/K\) has no nontrivial normal \(p\)-subgroups.
* (d) Give an example in which \(|G/K|\) is divisible by \(p\).

**6.** Let \(G\) be a group and \(\alpha\) an automorphism of \(G\). Suppose \(g\) and \(h\) are elements of \(G\) with \(\alpha(g)=h\). Prove that there exists a group \(\widetilde{G}\) such that \(G\) is isomorphic to a normal subgroup of \(\widetilde{G}\), and the images of \(g\) and \(h\) in \(\widetilde{G}\) are conjugate in \(\widetilde{G}\).
