# Algebra first year exam, August 2015, Part 1

*Answer four problems. (If you turn in more, the first four will be graded.) Within reason, you may quote theorems as long as you state them clearly.*

**1.** Give an example of each of the following, with some explanation.
* (a) A nonabelian group, all of whose subgroups are normal.
* (b) A nonabelian simple group.
* (c) A group \(G\) and a normal subgroup \(N\) of \(G\) such that \(N\) is not a characteristic subgroup of \(G\).

**2.** Let \(G\) be a group. Prove that the following are equivalent:
* (a) \(G\) is not equal to the union of its proper subgroups.
* (b) \(G\) is a cyclic group.

**3.** Let \(S_n\) denote the symmetric group on \(n\) symbols.
* (a) Define the sign \(\epsilon(\sigma)\) of \(\sigma \in S_n\).
* (b) Prove that your definition from (a) is independent of any choices that need to be made.
* (c) Use your definition from (a) to prove that \(\epsilon(\sigma \circ \tau)=\epsilon(\sigma)\epsilon(\tau)\) for all \(\sigma,\tau\in S_n\).

**4.** Let \(G\) be a nontrivial finite \(p\)-group, where \(p\) is a prime, and let \(H\) be the subgroup of \(G\) generated by the set
\[
\{[x,y]:x,y\in G\}\cup\{x^p:x\in G\}.
\]
Prove that \(H\) is a proper normal subgroup of \(G\).

**5.** Let \(G\) be a finite group of order \(pqr\), where \(p\), \(q\) and \(r\) are primes and \(p<q<r\). Prove that \(G\) has a normal non-trivial Sylow subgroup.

**6.** For each homomorphism \(\phi:\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}\to\operatorname{Aut}(\mathbb{Z}/8\mathbb{Z})\) describe the semidirect product \((\mathbb{Z}/8\mathbb{Z})\rtimes_\phi(\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z})\). Prove that these groups are pairwise nonisomorphic.
