# Numerical Analysis PhD exam, January 1996

**1.** Let \(A\) be a symmetric, positive definite matrix. Show that if \(A\) is \(LU\) factored, then the elements of \(U\) in absolute value are bounded by the largest diagonal element of \(A\).

**2.** Suppose the columns of a matrix \(A\) are independent. Given the \(QR\) factorization of \(A\), give a formula for the distance from some given vector \(b\) to the space spanned by the columns of \(A\).

**3.** Give a careful statement and proof of Gershgorin’s Theorem. Find the upper and lower bounds for the set of eigenvalues for the \(4\times 4\) Hilbert matrix having \((i,j)\)-th entry \((i+j-1)^{-1}\).

**4.** Explain how the singular values of a matrix can be used to determine the rank of a matrix in the presence of rounding errors.

**5.** Define the term “algorithm”. Explain what is meant by saying that an algorithm is well conditioned and numerically stable. Carefully formulate a numerically stable algorithm for computing the positive solution of the quadratic equation \(x^2+2px-q=0\), where \(p\) and \(q\) are arbitrary positive numbers. Justify the numerical stability of your algorithm.

**6.** Determine the cubic spline \(s(x)\) on the grid \(\{-1,0,1\}\) with \(s(-1)=s(0)=0\), \(s(1)=4\), and \(s''(-1)=s''(1)=0\).

**7.** For \(h>0\), let \(T(h)\) be the trapezoidal approximation of \(\tau=\int_a^b f(x)\,dx\), using an equi-spaced grid of step size \(h\).
* (a) What is the order of the error in this approximation as \(h\to 0\)?
* (b) Assuming that \(T(h)\) can be expressed as a power series of even powers of \(h\), show how a more accurate approximation can be obtained by using \(T(h)\) and \(T(h/2)\). Express this approximation in terms of \(T(h),T(h/2)\). (That is, you need to verify the first step in Romberg integration.)
* (c) Describe the method of Romberg integration. Formulate it in terms of a table (Neville type).

**8.** Let \(A\) be a nonsingular \(n\times n\) matrix and \(\{X_k\}\) a sequence of \(n\times n\) matrices generated by the iteration:
\[
X_{k+1}=X_k+X_k(I-AX_k).
\]
Show that if \(X_0\) is chosen such that the spectral radius of \(I-AX_0\) is strictly less than 1, then \(\{X_k\}\) converges to the inverse of \(A\).

**9.** State Euler’s method for approximating the solution to the differential equation
\[
\frac{dx}{dt}=f(x(t)),\qquad x(0)=x_0.
\]
Show that the error in Euler’s method is \(O(\Delta t)\), as \(\Delta t\to 0\), for \(t\) sufficiently small, where \(\Delta t\) is the step size.
